---
layout: post
title: "barnet (hus part II)"
hidden: true
---
<style type="text/css">
.more_info {
  border-bottom: 1px dotted;
  position: relative;
}

.more_info .title {
    position: absolute;
    top: 20px;
    background: silver;
    padding: 4px;
    left: 0;
    white-space: nowrap;
}
</style>

<p><i>25 ‎May ‎2024, ‏‎12:37:
<span class="more_info" title="You never told me about Troll in the Wings">Du berätta aldrig om troll i kulisserna för mig. </span> I found out about it in one of those August afternoons I spent lazily browsing on my computer while you worked in the other room. The play, the second official Mumin theatre adaptation written by Tove Jansson and directed by Vivica Bandler, is known today mostly because of its beginning, in which the Mumin actors enter the stage with intact costumes to then remove their huge, fluffy heads – unmasking, amongst others, the perfectly childish smirk of Lasse Pöysti, playing Moomintrollet. This was ostensibly done to give the actors more freedom with voice and facial expressions, but a dark-internet myth has gathered around the play: children in the audience terrorized by this quasi Mumin decapitation, revealing horribly out-of-place humans inside their white, rotund bodies. In the following performances and with the TV broadcast the traumatic incident was repeated, and the play became a uniting traumatic memory for generations of Swedish children.</i></p>

<P> When I started writing this in May, I wanted to talk about childhood – mine and yours, or rather, the projection of mine on yours, because you don’t like talking about the past and I try to respect that. I wrote the above paragraph first; in the following months I found myself in need of more input, and I set out to look for more information on the traumatic moment. I was hoping to see the taking-off of the masks – to hear, if not see, the children’s reaction – but I haven’t been able to find any clips of it. In the (unofficial) Mumin wiki, which my research history states I consulted, this ‘decapitation’ is mentioned without any horrific undernotes. Were children really scared? Where did I get the idea that they were? While the absence of proof solidifies the status of the event as a myth, there must’ve been another source, expanding on the story to prove, once more, the Internet’s strange passion for finding the grotesque, the uncanny, the not-quite-right, the traumatising in children’s stories. And that I hadn’t just invented it. </P>
<P> You have, of course, no memory of Troll I kulisserna. You were born too late; the Mumin stories you grew up with were different, safe, an uncomplicated background: there, but never essential.<span class="more_info" title="But were there other stories of horror that captured you, when you were young?">Med fanns det någon annan marginell skräck från sagor som fängslade dig när du var liten?</span> You became uneasy when, during one of my marathons, I showed you the Mumin ’70 anime in which Mårran appears for the first time. After asking me to press stop, you told me of how deeply unsettling it was, as a child, to see her towering over Sniff; mysterious, cold, silent. A creature one couldn’t make sense of, couldn’t speak to. Did you have to distinguish between what your eyes just saw and the child’s memory, enlarged, made stranger against the backdrop of your mind?</P>

<P> Whether I came up with it or someone else, what feelings, fake or real, were activated and subsumed into the memory of the Mumin beheading, as it was passed on, shared, confused, installed in the precarious architecture of recollection - which <<span class="more_info" title=">pleasures and terrors">«njutningar och fasor»</span>, otherwise unspeakable, found their expression in it?</P>
